# Interface stability testing

The tests in this directory verify that the interfaces exposed by GHC's
core libraries do not inadvertently change. They use the `utils/dump-decls`
utility to dump all exported declarations of all exposed modules for the
following packages:

  * `base`
  * `ghc-experimental`
  * `template-haskell`
  * `ghc-prim`
  * `ghc-bignum`

These are compared against the expected exports in the test's corresponding
`.stdout` file.

Stability expectations vary between these packages: Changes to the
interface of `base` normally need a [CLC proposal](https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee).
The interfaces for the other packages listed are tracked primarily to
prevent _accidental_ changes to them when making changes in
`ghc-internal`, from which they re-export many things.


## Updating expected output

The `base-exports` test in particular has rather platform-dependent output.
Consequently, updating its output can be a bit tricky. There are two ways by
which one can do this:

#### Extrapolation

The various platforms' `base-exports.stdout` files are
   similar enough that one can often apply the same patch of one file to the
   others.  For instance:
   ```
   for f in testsuite/tests/interface-stability/base-exports.stdout-*; do
     git show testsuite/tests/interface-stability \
       | sed -e "s/base-exports.stdout/$(basename $f)/" \
       | patch -p1
   done
   ```
   In the case of conflicts, increasing the fuzz factor (using `-F`) can be
   quite effective.

#### Using CI

Each CI job produces a tarball, `unexpected-test-output.tar.gz`,
   which contains the output produced by the job's failing tests. Simply
   download this tarball and extract the appropriate `base-exports.stdout-*`
   files into this directory.

Doing this by hand is of course very annoying. To make things faster, use the script in this folder called `download.base-exports.sh` :

* Running for the first time
    1. Find the URL for downloading unexpected-test-output.tar.gz. To do so
        * Go to the CI job page you want to download
        * Click on "Browse"
        * Find unexpected-test-output.tar.gz
        * Right-click the download link then "Copy link" (Firefox)
    2. The URL should look like this :
        `https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/jobs/2503744/artifacts/file/unexpected-test-output.tar.gz`
        * the prefix is   : `https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/jobs/`
        * the job ID is   : `2503744`
        * and the suffix  : `/artifacts/file/unexpected-test-output.tar.gz`
    3. The script prompts you with URL prefix and suffix.
    4. It will save a file to remember this, so you only need to do this once.
    5. If you need to change the URL, just edit the file `download-base-exports/url-unexpected-test-output` directly.

* Downloading the artifacts
    1. Find all the job IDs you want to download. For this, just go to the jobs
       page `https://gitlab.haskell.org/<YOUR-FORK>/ghc/-/jobs`
    2. Make sure you get all the artifacts. You need 3 of them.
       To get all 3 CI jobs, the label `javascript` must be on the MR.
       If you don't have the rights for adding these labels, ask.
          1. The `x86` CI job for darwin or linux : `base-exports.stdout`
          2. The `windows` job : `base-exports.stdout-mingw32`
          3. The `javascript` CI job :
                          `base-exports.stdout-javascript-unknown-ghcjs`
    3. Run the script with all the job IDs :
       `./download-base-exports.sh 2502789 2502792 2502793`

       Using a range downloads more artifacts than necessary, but is a
       no-brainer:

       `./download-base-exports.sh {2502789..2502795}`
